
Project Gutenberg EBook of Hamlet, by William Shakespeare

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the
United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.



Title: Hamlet

Author: William Shakespeare

Release Date: November 1998 [EBook #1524]

Last Updated: December 30, 2017

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAMLET ***



This etext was prepared by Dianne Bean.


THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK




by William Shakespeare






Contents

ACT I Scene I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle. Scene II.
Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle Scene III. A room in Polonius’s
house. Scene IV. The platform. Scene V. A more remote part of the
Castle.

ACT II Scene I. A room in Polonius’s house. Scene II. A room in the
Castle.

ACT III Scene I. A room in the Castle. Scene II. A hall in the Castle.
Scene III. A room in the Castle. Scene IV. Another room in the Castle.

ACT IV Scene I. A room in the Castle. Scene II. Another room in the
Castle. Scene III. Another room in the Castle. Scene IV. A plain in
Denmark. Scene V. Elsinore. A room in the Castle. Scene VI. Another
room in the Castle. Scene VII. Another room in the Castle.

ACT V Scene I. A churchyard. Scene II. A hall in the Castle.




 Dramatis Personæ

HAMLET, Prince of Denmark. CLAUDIUS, King of Denmark, Hamlet’s uncle.
The GHOST of the late king, Hamlet’s father. GERTRUDE, the Queen,
Hamlet’s mother, now wife of Claudius. POLONIUS, Lord Chamberlain.
LAERTES, Son to Polonius. OPHELIA, Daughter to Polonius. HORATIO,
Friend to Hamlet. FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway. VOLTEMAND, Courtier.
CORNELIUS, Courtier. ROSENCRANTZ, Courtier. GUILDENSTERN, Courtier.
MARCELLUS, Officer. BARNARDO, Officer. FRANCISCO, a Soldier OSRIC,
Courtier. REYNALDO, Servant to Polonius. Players. A Gentleman,
Courtier. A Priest. Two Clowns, Grave-diggers. A Captain. English
Ambassadors. Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers,
and Attendants.

SCENE. Elsinore.



ACT I

SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.

 Enter Francisco and Barnardo, two sentinels.

BARNARDO. Who’s there?

FRANCISCO. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO. Long live the King!

FRANCISCO. Barnardo?

BARNARDO. He.

FRANCISCO. You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO. ’Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO. For this relief much thanks. ’Tis bitter cold, And I am sick
at heart.

BARNARDO. Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO. Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO. Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The
rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

 Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

FRANCISCO. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?

HORATIO. Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS. And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO. Give you good night.

MARCELLUS. O, farewell, honest soldier, who hath reliev’d you?

FRANCISCO. Barnardo has my place. Give you good-night.

 [_Exit._]

MARCELLUS. Holla, Barnardo!

BARNARDO. Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO. A piece of him.

BARNARDO. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.

MARCELLUS. What, has this thing appear’d again tonight?

BARNARDO. I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS. Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy, And will not let belief
take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of
this night, That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes
and speak to it.

HORATIO. Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.

BARNARDO. Sit down awhile, And let us once again assail your ears, That
are so fortified against our story, What we two nights have seen.

HORATIO. Well, sit we down, And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO. Last night of all, When yond same star that’s westward from
the pole, Had made his course t’illume that part of heaven Where now it
burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one—

MARCELLUS. Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again.

 Enter Ghost.

BARNARDO. In the same figure, like the King that’s dead.

MARCELLUS. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS. Question it, Horatio.

HORATIO. What art thou that usurp’st this time of night, Together with
that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did
sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak.

MARCELLUS. It is offended.

BARNARDO. See, it stalks away.

HORATIO. Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee speak!

 [_Exit Ghost._]

MARCELLUS. ’Tis gone, and will not answer.

BARNARDO. How now, Horatio! You tremble and look pale. Is not this
something more than fantasy? What think you on’t?

HORATIO. Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible
and true avouch Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS. Is it not like the King?

HORATIO. As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on
When he th’ambitious Norway combated; So frown’d he once, when in an
angry parle He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. ’Tis strange.

MARCELLUS. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial
stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO. In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the
gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our
state.

MARCELLUS. Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this
same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of
the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon And foreign mart for
implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week. What might be toward, that
this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who
is’t that can inform me?

HORATIO. That can I; At least, the whisper goes so. Our last King,
Whose image even but now appear’d to us, Was, as you know, by
Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride, Dar’d
to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet, For so this side of our
known world esteem’d him, Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal’d
compact, Well ratified by law and heraldry, Did forfeit, with his life,
all those his lands Which he stood seiz’d of, to the conqueror; Against
the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our King; which had return’d
To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as by the
same cov’nant And carriage of the article design’d, His fell to Hamlet.
Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle, hot and full, Hath in
the skirts of Norway, here and there, Shark’d up a list of lawless
resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach
in’t; which is no other, As it doth well appear unto our state, But to
recover of us by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid
lands So by his father lost. And this, I take it, Is the main motive of
our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of
this post-haste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO. I think it be no other but e’en so: Well may it sort that
this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch so like the King
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO. A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye. In the most high and
palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves
stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the
Roman streets; As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun;