lord, already.

HAMLET. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

GHOST. [_Cries under the stage._] Swear.

HAMLET. Ha, ha boy, say’st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny? Come on,
you hear this fellow in the cellarage. Consent to swear.

HORATIO. Propose the oath, my lord.

HAMLET. Never to speak of this that you have seen. Swear by my sword.

GHOST. [_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET. _Hic et ubique?_ Then we’ll shift our ground. Come hither,
gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Never to speak of
this that you have heard. Swear by my sword.

GHOST. [_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET. Well said, old mole! Canst work i’ th’earth so fast? A worthy
pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

HORATIO. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

HAMLET. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more
things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your
philosophy. But come, Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How
strange or odd soe’er I bear myself,— As I perchance hereafter shall
think meet To put an antic disposition on— That you, at such times
seeing me, never shall, With arms encumber’d thus, or this head-shake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As ‘Well, we know’, or ‘We
could and if we would’, Or ‘If we list to speak’; or ‘There be and if
they might’, Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught
of me:—this not to do. So grace and mercy at your most need help you,
Swear.

GHOST. [_Beneath._] Swear.

HAMLET. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit. So, gentlemen, With all my love I
do commend me to you; And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do
t’express his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack.
Let us go in together, And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The
time is out of joint. O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it
right. Nay, come, let’s go together.

 [_Exeunt._]



ACT II

SCENE I. A room in Polonius’s house.

 Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.

POLONIUS. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO. I will, my lord.

POLONIUS. You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo, Before you
visit him, to make inquiry Of his behaviour.

REYNALDO. My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS. Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir, Enquire me
first what Danskers are in Paris; And how, and who, what means, and
where they keep, What company, at what expense; and finding By this
encompassment and drift of question, That they do know my son, come you
more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it. Take you as
’twere some distant knowledge of him, As thus, ‘I know his father and
his friends, And in part him’—do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO. Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS. ‘And in part him, but,’ you may say, ‘not well; But if’t be
he I mean, he’s very wild; Addicted so and so;’ and there put on him
What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank As may dishonour him;
take heed of that; But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips As are
companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO. As gaming, my lord?

POLONIUS. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, Quarrelling, drabbing.
You may go so far.

REYNALDO. My lord, that would dishonour him.

POLONIUS. Faith no, as you may season it in the charge. You must not
put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency; That’s not
my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly That they may seem the
taints of liberty; The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness
in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.

REYNALDO. But my good lord—

POLONIUS. Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO. Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS. Marry, sir, here’s my drift, And I believe it is a fetch of
warrant. You laying these slight sullies on my son, As ’twere a thing a
little soil’d i’ th’ working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you
would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you
breathe of guilty, be assur’d He closes with you in this consequence;
‘Good sir,’ or so; or ‘friend,’ or ‘gentleman’— According to the phrase
or the addition Of man and country.

REYNALDO. Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS. And then, sir, does he this,— He does—What was I about to
say? By the mass, I was about to say something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO. At ‘closes in the consequence.’ At ‘friend or so,’ and
‘gentleman.’

POLONIUS. At ‘closes in the consequence’ ay, marry! He closes with you
thus: ‘I know the gentleman, I saw him yesterday, or t’other day, Or
then, or then, with such and such; and, as you say, There was he
gaming, there o’ertook in’s rouse, There falling out at tennis’: or
perchance, ‘I saw him enter such a house of sale’— _Videlicet_, a
brothel, or so forth. See you now; Your bait of falsehood takes this
carp of truth; And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses,
and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out. So by my
former lecture and advice Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO. My lord, I have.

POLONIUS. God b’ wi’ you, fare you well.

REYNALDO. Good my lord.

POLONIUS. Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO. I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS. And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO. Well, my lord.

POLONIUS. Farewell.

 [_Exit Reynaldo._]

 Enter Ophelia.

How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?

OPHELIA. Alas, my lord, I have been so affrighted.

POLONIUS. With what, in the name of God?

OPHELIA. My lord, as I was sewing in my chamber, Lord Hamlet, with his
doublet all unbrac’d, No hat upon his head, his stockings foul’d,
Ungart’red, and down-gyved to his ankle, Pale as his shirt, his knees
knocking each other, And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had
been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors, he comes before me.

POLONIUS. Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA. My lord, I do not know, but truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS. What said he?

OPHELIA. He took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the
length of all his arm; And with his other hand thus o’er his brow, He
falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stay’d he
so, At last,—a little shaking of mine arm, And thrice his head thus
waving up and down, He rais’d a sigh so piteous and profound As it did
seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being. That done, he lets me
go, And with his head over his shoulder turn’d He seem’d to find his
way without his eyes, For out o’ doors he went without their help, And
to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King. This is the very
ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself, And leads the
will to desperate undertakings, As oft as any passion under heaven That
does afflict our natures. I am sorry,— What, have you given him any
hard words of late?

OPHELIA. No, my good lord; but as you did command, I did repel his
letters and denied His access to me.

POLONIUS. That hath made him mad. I am sorry that with better heed and
judgment I had not quoted him. I fear’d he did but trifle, And meant to
wreck thee. But beshrew my jealousy! It seems it is as proper to our
age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the
younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King. This must be
known, which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate
to utter love.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A room in the Castle.

 Enter King, Queen, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and Attendants.

KING. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Moreover that we much
did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty
sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlet’s transformation; so I call
it, Since nor th’exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.
What it should be, More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him
So much from th’understanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entrea