ather; says she hears There’s tricks
i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her heart, Spurns enviously at
straws, speaks things in doubt, That carry but half sense. Her speech
is nothing, Yet the unshaped use of it doth move The hearers to
collection; they aim at it, And botch the words up fit to their own
thoughts, Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,
Indeed would make one think there might be thought, Though nothing
sure, yet much unhappily. ’Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

QUEEN. Let her come in.

 [_Exit Gentleman._]

To my sick soul, as sin’s true nature is, Each toy seems prologue to
some great amiss. So full of artless jealousy is guilt, It spills
itself in fearing to be spilt.

 Enter Ophelia.

OPHELIA. Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

QUEEN. How now, Ophelia?

OPHELIA. [_Sings._] How should I your true love know From another one?
By his cockle bat and staff And his sandal shoon.

QUEEN. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

OPHELIA. Say you? Nay, pray you mark. [_Sings._] He is dead and gone,
lady, He is dead and gone, At his head a grass green turf, At his heels
a stone.

QUEEN. Nay, but Ophelia—

OPHELIA. Pray you mark. [_Sings._] White his shroud as the mountain
snow.

 Enter King.

QUEEN. Alas, look here, my lord!

OPHELIA. [_Sings._] Larded all with sweet flowers; Which bewept to the
grave did go With true-love showers.

KING. How do you, pretty lady?

OPHELIA. Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker’s daughter.
Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your
table!

KING. Conceit upon her father.

OPHELIA. Pray you, let’s have no words of this; but when they ask you
what it means, say you this: [_Sings._] Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s
day, All in the morning betime, And I a maid at your window, To be your
Valentine.

   Then up he rose and donn’d his clothes, And dupp’d the chamber door,
   Let in the maid, that out a maid Never departed more.

KING. Pretty Ophelia!

OPHELIA. Indeed la, without an oath, I’ll make an end on’t. [_Sings._]
By Gis and by Saint Charity, Alack, and fie for shame! Young men will
do’t if they come to’t; By Cock, they are to blame.

   Quoth she, before you tumbled me, You promis’d me to wed. So would I
   ha’ done, by yonder sun, An thou hadst not come to my bed.

KING. How long hath she been thus?

OPHELIA. I hope all will be well. We must be patient. But I cannot
choose but weep, to think they would lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My
brother shall know of it. And so I thank you for your good counsel.
Come, my coach! Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies; good
night, good night.

 [_Exit._]

KING. Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.

 [_Exit Horatio._]

O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs All from her father’s
death. O Gertrude, Gertrude, When sorrows come, they come not single
spies, But in battalions. First, her father slain; Next, your son gone;
and he most violent author Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers For good
Polonius’ death; and we have done but greenly In hugger-mugger to inter
him. Poor Ophelia Divided from herself and her fair judgment, Without
the which we are pictures or mere beasts. Last, and as much containing
as all these, Her brother is in secret come from France, Feeds on his
wonder, keeps himself in clouds, And wants not buzzers to infect his
ear With pestilent speeches of his father’s death, Wherein necessity,
of matter beggar’d, Will nothing stick our person to arraign In ear and
ear. O my dear Gertrude, this, Like to a murdering piece, in many
places Gives me superfluous death.

 [_A noise within._]

QUEEN. Alack, what noise is this?

KING. Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

 Enter a Gentleman.

What is the matter?

GENTLEMAN. Save yourself, my lord. The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste Than young Laertes, in a
riotous head, O’erbears your offices. The rabble call him lord, And, as
the world were now but to begin, Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word, They cry ‘Choose we! Laertes
shall be king!’ Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
‘Laertes shall be king, Laertes king.’

QUEEN. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry. O, this is counter,
you false Danish dogs.

 [_A noise within._]

KING. The doors are broke.

 Enter Laertes, armed; Danes following.

LAERTES. Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.

Danes. No, let’s come in.

LAERTES. I pray you, give me leave.

DANES. We will, we will.

 [_They retire without the door._]

LAERTES. I thank you. Keep the door. O thou vile king, Give me my
father.

QUEEN. Calmly, good Laertes.

LAERTES. That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard; Cries
cuckold to my father, brands the harlot Even here between the chaste
unsmirched brow Of my true mother.

KING. What is the cause, Laertes, That thy rebellion looks so
giant-like?— Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person. There’s such
divinity doth hedge a king, That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.—Tell me, Laertes, Why thou art thus
incens’d.—Let him go, Gertrude:— Speak, man.

LAERTES. Where is my father?

KING. Dead.

QUEEN. But not by him.

KING. Let him demand his fill.

LAERTES. How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with. To hell,
allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil! Conscience and grace, to the
profoundest pit! I dare damnation. To this point I stand, That both the
worlds, I give to negligence, Let come what comes; only I’ll be
reveng’d Most throughly for my father.

KING. Who shall stay you?

LAERTES. My will, not all the world. And for my means, I’ll husband
them so well, They shall go far with little.

KING. Good Laertes, If you desire to know the certainty Of your dear
father’s death, is’t writ in your revenge That, sweepstake, you will
draw both friend and foe, Winner and loser?

LAERTES. None but his enemies.

KING. Will you know them then?

LAERTES. To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms; And, like the
kind life-rendering pelican, Repast them with my blood.

KING. Why, now you speak Like a good child and a true gentleman. That I
am guiltless of your father’s death, And am most sensibly in grief for
it, It shall as level to your judgment ’pear As day does to your eye.

DANES. [_Within._] Let her come in.

LAERTES. How now! What noise is that?

 Re-enter Ophelia, fantastically dressed with straws and flowers.

O heat, dry up my brains. Tears seven times salt, Burn out the sense
and virtue of mine eye. By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,
Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May! Dear maid, kind sister,
sweet Ophelia! O heavens, is’t possible a young maid’s wits Should be
as mortal as an old man’s life? Nature is fine in love, and where ’tis
fine, It sends some precious instance of itself After the thing it
loves.

OPHELIA. [_Sings._] They bore him barefac’d on the bier, Hey no nonny,
nonny, hey nonny And on his grave rain’d many a tear.— Fare you well,
my dove!

LAERTES. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge, It could not
move thus.

OPHELIA. You must sing ‘Down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.’ O, how
the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s
daughter.

LAERTES. This nothing’s more than matter.

OPHELIA. There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance; pray love, remember.
And there is pansies, that’s for thoughts.

LAERTES. A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.

OPHELIA. There’s fennel for you, and columbines. There’s rue for you;
and here’s some for me. We may call it herb of grace o’ Sundays. O you
must wear your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy. I would give you
some v