o but dally. I pray you pass
with your best violence. I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

LAERTES. Say you so? Come on.

 [_They play._]

OSRIC. Nothing neither way.

LAERTES. Have at you now.

 [_Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they change rapiers, and
 Hamlet wounds Laertes._]

KING. Part them; they are incens’d.

HAMLET. Nay, come again!

 [_The Queen falls._]

OSRIC. Look to the Queen there, ho!

HORATIO. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?

OSRIC. How is’t, Laertes?

LAERTES. Why, as a woodcock to my own springe, Osric. I am justly
kill’d with mine own treachery.

HAMLET. How does the Queen?

KING. She swoons to see them bleed.

QUEEN. No, no, the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet! The drink, the
drink! I am poison’d.

 [_Dies._]

HAMLET. O villany! Ho! Let the door be lock’d: Treachery! Seek it out.

 [_Laertes falls._]

LAERTES. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain. No medicine in the
world can do thee good. In thee there is not half an hour of life; The
treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenom’d. The foul
practice Hath turn’d itself on me. Lo, here I lie, Never to rise again.
Thy mother’s poison’d. I can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.

HAMLET. The point envenom’d too! Then, venom, to thy work.

 [_Stabs the King._]

OSRIC and LORDS. Treason! treason!

KING. O yet defend me, friends. I am but hurt.

HAMLET. Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane, Drink off this
potion. Is thy union here? Follow my mother.

 [_King dies._]

LAERTES. He is justly serv’d. It is a poison temper’d by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet. Mine and my father’s death
come not upon thee, Nor thine on me.

 [_Dies._]

HAMLET. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee. I am dead, Horatio.
Wretched Queen, adieu. You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act, Had I but time,—as this
fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest,—O, I could tell you,—
But let it be. Horatio, I am dead, Thou liv’st; report me and my cause
aright To the unsatisfied.

HORATIO. Never believe it. I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here’s yet some liquor left.

HAMLET. As th’art a man, Give me the cup. Let go; by Heaven, I’ll
have’t. O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus
unknown, shall live behind me. If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw thy
breath in pain, To tell my story.

 [_March afar off, and shot within._]

What warlike noise is this?

OSRIC. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland, To the
ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley.

HAMLET. O, I die, Horatio. The potent poison quite o’er-crows my
spirit: I cannot live to hear the news from England, But I do prophesy
th’election lights On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice. So tell him,
with the occurrents more and less, Which have solicited. The rest is
silence.

 [_Dies._]

HORATIO. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince, And
flights of angels sing thee to thy rest. Why does the drum come hither?

 [_March within._]

 Enter Fortinbras, the English Ambassadors and others.

FORTINBRAS. Where is this sight?

HORATIO. What is it you would see? If aught of woe or wonder, cease
your search.

FORTINBRAS. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death, What feast is
toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So
bloodily hast struck?

FIRST AMBASSADOR. The sight is dismal; And our affairs from England
come too late. The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, To
tell him his commandment is fulfill’d, That Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern are dead. Where should we have our thanks?

HORATIO. Not from his mouth, Had it th’ability of life to thank you. He
never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this
bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England Are
here arriv’d, give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to
the view, And let me speak to th’ yet unknowing world How these things
came about. So shall you hear Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts, Of
accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning
and forc’d cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Fall’n on the
inventors’ heads. All this can I Truly deliver.

FORTINBRAS. Let us haste to hear it, And call the noblest to the
audience. For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune. I have some rights
of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite
me.

HORATIO. Of that I shall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth
whose voice will draw on more. But let this same be presently
perform’d, Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more mischance On
plots and errors happen.

FORTINBRAS. Let four captains Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on, To have prov’d most royally; and
for his passage, The soldiers’ music and the rites of war Speak loudly
for him. Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this Becomes the field,
but here shows much amiss. Go, bid the soldiers shoot.

 [_A dead march._]

 [_Exeunt, bearing off the bodies, after which a peal of ordnance is
 shot off._]




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hamlet, by William Shakespeare

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAMLET***

***** This file should be named 1524-0.txt or 1524-0.zip ***** This and
all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/2/1524/

This etext was prepared by Dianne Bean.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific
permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for
nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth i